---
layout: home
title: Welcome
---

Welcome, this is the place where I describe my experiences of being a double bachelor honors track student in Computer Science and Mathematics at the University of Eindhoven. I am originally from Vilnius, Lithuania, where I finished a private international Highschool and decided to study abroad in a technical university. Unlike for most highschool students, choosing a program to study wasn't my problem at first, I was always a student of math and thus, this was always my first choice of study. However, in the last few years of highschool I started taking learning the basics of programming and slowly started building my first computer programs and falling in love with it in the process. And there I was, successfully applying to a double degree in Math and CS. My whole life I was interested in logical problem solving, which is mostly how my love for math came about. What I realized after some time is that it is not enough for me to stop at a theoretical solution of the problem, what is left is a practical implementation which is as important, because otherwise, looking from an abstract point of view, something not being implement loses its potential, unless it is used to prove something else that is implemented. With the notion of implementation, of course, programming comes about. It offers me the ability to see the theoretical framework come to life, this way, isolating and generalizing a real life problem for future use with a help of algorithm, feels simply amazing to me. I am very dedicated student with a lot of passion for what I am studying. I spent most of my time studying and day by day broadening my knowledge. In the upcoming blog posts I will generally talk about my experience as a student and build up the story about me through the lens of what I do right now whilst creating plans for my future.
