---
layout: post
title: "My First Blog Post"
date: 2025-01-12
categories: blogging
---

Hey people from the future! As you probably already know from the introduction, I am a student at TU/e currently enrolled in my second year. 
There will definitely come a time when I will write about my experience in the first year being a double bachelor, but that is not going to 
happen in this post. Here I want to talk about something more specific, namely, competitive programming and my limited journey through the 
depths of it. Probably unlike most people, I got involved in problem-solving using programming and algorithms via [CodeWars](https://www.codewars.com/users/WOWnas) 
in September 2022, a platform designated for coding practice and skill-building. I really enjoyed solving the problems and getting up the ranks, 
but I was still really bad. I remember being frustrated when solving the harder problems because I was getting Time Limit Exceeded (TLE) and 
I couldn't figure out why. I had no idea what *algorithmic time complexity* was at that time as I was a complete beginner. I remember complaining 
to my girlfriend that I knew the solution, but for some reason, my program was too slow. I had no idea that using a triple loop on an input 
measured in thousands would take too much time when the problem was a dynamic programming one. Also, I couldn't understand the provided solutions to 
the problems so at some point I quit and switched to learning web development, which was not less frustrating, but still, a little bit more 
accessible, I would argue.

A year later, I got involved with it again via [LeetCode](https://leetcode.com/u/WOWnas/) (This is my old account). It was August, just before 
my first year of studies. I then began to understand a little bit better what I was getting into. I began, of course, by solving the easy problems 
first and trying a couple of medium ones alongside. I remember them not being that challenging, but still requiring a little bit of practice. 
It is not surprising that even the easy problems took some time to tackle as I had never done anything remotely close to this before. All of my prior coding was following tutorials and doing 
a couple of bigger projects on my own, but completely unrelated and not having any sophisticated problems in need of efficient solutions. 
But before I could go on with experiencing a little bit more of such problem-solving, the study year was just around the corner and very quickly 
my time and focus shifted. Studying was all I managed to do for around half a year until I attended a lecture that was about to change that. 
During the break, a presentation was given, after which first year Computer Science students were invited to attend a small practice competition hosted 
by the Competitive Programming and Problem Solving (CPPS) Honors Track. I decided to go since studying university's material
was taking a toll on me and I was slowly losing motivation and also stepping into burn-out territory. During that practice competition, 
I was very much humbled, but at the same time, surprised. I couldn't solve a single problem, or even if I thought I could, I 
just got Wrong Answer (WA) without really understanding why. However, I was not the only one like that. There were a number of people that didn't do well 
either, and since I had impostor syndrome, it made me feel a little bit better about myself. On the other hand, there were other teams, including a team of girls from Computer 
Science program that solved almost all of the problems and as I learned later, they went to a Competitive Programming oriented Highschool, which is quite
strange and surprising that such a thing even exists. After the competition and a few discussions with my girlfriend and parents, 
I decided that I will apply for the Competitive Programming and Problem Solving track. It is a 2-year-long track starting in the second year of a Bachelor Degree. It is
the most popular track with quite a lot of applications (around 50 out of 300 students), but only 15 are usually accepted. Since I passed all the courses and had 
good grades, which were the requirements, I thought I had at least some chance (although I had no confidence) of being accepted.

This is where my real journey starts. I started grinding LeetCode questions after creating a brand [new account](https://leetcode.com/u/Ignas_Sablinskas/) 
and also got familiar with [Codeforces](https://codeforces.com/profile/walkieme). I needed as many problems solved as I could so that I look motivated and 
driven to the track coordinators during the interview and also in my motivational letter for the application. During that time I actually started seeing the scale of Competitive 
Programming and the population associated with it. I was very overwhelmed and due to the constant struggles I faced solving problems, I thought I wouldn't get better and my lack of 
confidence was growing. I couldn't even solve the easiest problems and thus I started feeling very demotivated. But I didn't want to give up, so I started 
gradually learning new algorithms and tackling the problems one by one without letting the doubts take over me. I managed to solve around 180 problems in a span of a month, next to my actual studies. That 
I thought was an achievement worth a praise. Also, during that period I decided to actually take Competitive Programming itself more seriously than I thought I will
when first starting it. I set a goal of reaching 2000 rating on Codeforces (97th percentile) at some point in time, in particular, I wanted to see it happen 
in the span of 4-5 years. I knew that I would be studying, doing a bunch of other projects and perhaps, working, so I didn't want to set the deadline earlier 
than that. Earlier in the year, I wanted to do a similar thing for chess, but let's be honest, chess can get very frustrating, especially for a person like me, 
who was making blunders left and right immediately after realizing having too little time on the clock. Fast forward a month, the track application interview has 
come, and I thought I did pretty bad, so I felt quite sad and I considered it as being just another failure of mine, but it wasn't. A surprising acceptance letter 
arrived and I couldn't wait to begin the next year.

During the start of this year, almost everything I did was solve problems for the track's local website, which contains all of the contest problems from previous years. 
I was spending my whole weekends and week day evenings on it, constantly feeding my addiction, until I realized that I was almost the only one doing this. Other people didn't 
take it that seriously, except for one guy in my group, he loved solving problems and he is very determined to even qualify for the world championship. But with time I started 
slowing down a little bit and focusing on my studies instead. Up to this day, I am still doubting myself whether I can reach a high rank and be actually good at this, 
but I will definitely give it a try. I currently have a rank of 1300 on Codeforces and have a goal of reaching 1500 by the end of this academic year. Competitive Programming, 
I would argue, is very time-consuming and takes a lot of patience alongside your mental energy. But isn't solving problems just that? Allocating your time and mental 
energy to some task until a solution is present that is the real counterpart of the mental processes that you wasted your time and energy on. The same exact thing holds for mathematics. 
I can think of a huge number of times simply staring at a blank piece of paper not knowing where to start and being angry at myself for the damn day that I wasted. I admit 
that I don't make a lot of progress right now in terms of competitive programming, but I still think it is too early to judge whether I am not meant for this. I will still try it, especially with the help 
from my Competitive Programming group with which I have meetings with every week. We were divided into 5 groups of 3 with whom we are competing in contests and closely solve 
problems with. They become good friends and we are having a lot of fun together, which I think my current experience with CPPS is all about. A bunch of people having fun 
tackling complicated problems.

All in all, I never thought I would do something like this, but I am loving it, at least for now. I think I understand the complexity of competitive programming as a whole better right now, 
next to its real-world usefulness and applications. I got to know a lot of smart people because I had the confidence to try something new and I don't regret it a bit. 
After all, I don't think Competitive Programming can really get boring for me, so I will always find it interesting and addictive. One of the main reasons being that it is the perfect middle 
between Mathematics and Computer Science, the two subjects that I am certain will be worth my time until the very last day.

