---
layout: post
title: "First year as a student"
date: 2025-01-23
categories: blogging
---

Hey people from the future! Currently, I am a second-year bachelor student of Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science at Technology University of Eindhoven **(TU/e)**. I believe now is a good time 
to reflect on the ups and downs of the past academic year. A completely new 
stage of my life started on August 16, 2023. I left my home in Vilnius, Lithuania, in the very 
morning after saying goodbyes to my mom, brother, and sister and started a day-long drive with my 
dad to the Netherlands. It was going to be the longest time that I hadn't seen my family 
members up to that point. On the one hand, I didn't know what to expect, but on the other, I felt I 
was ready. Just the night before, I had a huge toothache and we actually went to the dentist in 
the morning, but it didn't help. During the whole journey, my tooth hurt, so the travel wasn't as romantic 
and reflective as one would expect (Later on that week I got my tooth nerves pulled out). Later that night, we slept in some hotel near the border of the 
Netherlands and the next morning we were already in my apartment, getting the keys. 

I was waiting for exactly this for the whole last high school year in 2022-2023. Since then, I started 
looking for universities to study at, after which the place of living followed, which, given the
student housing situation in the Netherlands, wasn't an easy task. Finally, I got the keys and 
spent some time in the apartment for everything to sink in. But we couldn't take too long of a break, 
since my dad had to leave the next day for a meeting in some place next to Eindhoven. Thus, we went 
to IKEA and bought all the required furniture and accidentally met another Lithuanian guy who 
was about to be a first-year in Mechanical Engineering. Now, to give you a little bit of context, even though I said that I 
felt ready, it wasn't exactly what you probably think. I had a huge impostor syndrome when 
coming into all of this. The only confidence I had was being able to live and study alone. 
Otherwise, I was very self-aware and other students seemed just way cooler than me, especially since I didn't 
really know how to make friends as I had never gone to any single party, club, or bar, never drank, smoked, or 
done anything close to that. Most of what I did during my last high school years was spend time with 
my girlfriend, do sports, and study, whereas the latter took the majority of my time. I also had a 
very wild character, but only next to a few people, the ones that I could trust. Almost all of 
them said that I was some sort of genius, but deep down I knew that this was not the case. Instead, I had a huge strength that 
not many people took notice of - being very curious and eager to learn. I never doubted myself in that regard and I knew that I 
could somehow pass all the courses if I had to, even if it exhausted all of my time. That is why I knew I was ready. 

While other people were making friends, going to bars, and having fun during the Introduction Week, just before the start of 
the academic year, I always left early and went home to prepare. Only a few weeks before the study year, I got to know 
that we would be using the Java Programming Language in most of the courses that required coding. Hence, 
I began learning it instead of spending my time socializing. I just couldn't wait to start the new 
year. I made a couple of friends, but at the same time, I was being very cautious since I wanted to 
get the smartest friends, as that would increase my chances of surviving. But as I later learned, 
that is not always the best choice. All non-first years that I talked with before the year began 
said that Mathematics was going to be hard in the first year and that we should take it seriously, 
which kind of scared me. Moreover, I didn't really see a lot of seriousness in their faces when 
they got to know that I was doing a double bachelor, as if they knew that there was a small chance I 
would succeed. I was pretty naive, so I couldn't care less. The more I talked with the first years, 
the more I was intimidated by how smart they seemed, and not knowing how to talk to people 
didn't help me with that. I was kind of feeling left out and at some point just crumbled and lost 
my ability to really make new connections. I drifted into studying and the year began. I remember 
the first homework group I was in and the first assignment we had to do. I asked one of the people 
to do some task or another and he replied to me saying that he does not work during the weekends. 
That surprised the hell out of me and was one of the first moments of realization that I might be 
onto something having such dedication to study where other people were too chill and so I could 
surpass them quite easily. I started doing all the homework for my groups and got decent grades
from them. I didn't trust my teammates. That gave me some confidence. However, being such an imposter, all I said is that I am missing something when judging their ability to do math and they are simply better than me in everything else.
Moreover, the confidence I got was only on the side of mathematics. Remember, I was studying computer science as well. 
And there it was a slightly different story. There it was *wayyyyy* worse. First of all, I was completely self-taught and 
didn't really have any Computer Science people to compare myself to, hence, clueless I was... In one of the courses, students had 
a possibility to do homework tasks that were on a different level than standard ones, but to qualify for those you had to pass a 
number of tests and place higher than 70% of the students. I failed to do that and thus got very disappointed. 
I had a flashback of my failure to get into another university that I tried to, namely, Delft, where the 
selection procedure really shattered my reality of my ability to solve problems and I placed around 
the top thousand out of two or three thousand applicants. These are the moments that always reminded me that I am far from the 
best and that there are lots of people out there who are way past my level. I always knew that and it seemed like nothing 
could change my mind on that. This was the brain disease that I had and still have to some extent up to this day 
and it really makes your life harder, trust me. I *always* want to be the *best* at everything. I don't know why, but the fact that I feel this way just makes my life harder.

As time went on, I kept proving to myself that I am capable of doing a double bachelor and getting 
good grades, but still was scared to talk to other people in a sophisticated manner. This haunted 
me for quite some time until I found a couple of friends that I more or less freely communicate with. One of them even felt 
exactly the way I did, therefore, seeing some of my traits in him, I could better re-engineer the problems I had and it 
actually made sense. Now it was around the third quartile. We went on a small trip around the Netherlands during the Carnival 
Holidays, which was pretty nice. I also got my grades of the previous quartile and they were really good, so I was overall 
happy. However, I felt really weak. All I did was study for the past 6 months. Even going home for the winter holidays wasn't 
an exception. I was dedicated, or at least it seemed like it on the outside. What actually was happening was a different 
story. I was getting addicted to video games and watching online streaming platforms like Twitch. Usually, I would just wake up 
and start my day with a bunch of YouTube, then switch to Twitch and study while watching them the whole day. My mind was so 
crowded and full of distractions because of that. I couldn't think clearly and was a mess. My whole body was weak too, since at that 
point I hadn't exercised for literally half a year. The good thing was that I had fewer courses to take in my third quartile, 
since that is how my schedule was made. That helped me quite a lot, since after the trip I got sick for 3 weeks straight. I
think I got a light version of pneumonia. But since the healthcare system in the Netherlands is really weird, I couldn't even 
make a normal appointment and the non-emergency phone of the hospital, as far as I tried, didn't answer. It was just a 
nightmare. My girlfriend came by to help me out and then she got sick, but me being a caring person, I went to help her, so 
I got sick again and the chain continued. During the time, studying was pretty hard, but I still had to. That is the cost. I 
knew that these types of setbacks and the way of getting out of them is what will distinguish me from other people in the 
future. So I didn't give up and finished the quartile with great grades again. Also, during the third quartile, I decided to 
attend an introductory programming contest about which I talked in my first blog. I wanted to spice up my study year because 
I was really losing it at that point. Striving for a new challenge I thought was a great idea. Also, due to my huge lack of 
confidence, I was constantly asking people how they were doing in some courses, homework exercises, etc., to get a better idea 
of how my abilities and knowledge lined up with theirs. Therefore, going into an introductory contest I thought would help me 
to grasp what first-year students are capable of. To summarize, that contest opened a new hobby for me that I never thought I 
would be so passionate about. 

The last quartile was probably the best out of them. My confidence situation was getting a little bit better, but was still 
messy as hell. Up to this day, I remember asking an overall smart student about one of the midterm questions that I didn't find 
particularly hard or easy, but he said he had completely no idea what he was asked and thus simply skipped it. This surprised 
the hell out of me because firstly, that would probably never happen to me and secondly, even if I didn't know what to do I 
would still try to exhaust all the different possibilities of solving it and at the end of the day write something down. That 
got me to a simple conclusion. Being smart doesn't equate at all with solving exams well or doing any other sort of exercises. 
It sounds so stupid right now, but focusing too much on the pure material was not only driving me crazy but also not even 
achieving what I wanted, namely, being better than everyone else in every aspect. Therefore, I decided that during summer I 
would create a couple of interesting projects and leave my studies aside for a while, which looking back at it now, was a good 
decision that paid off quite a lot. Regardless of that, one of the courses I had included a group project and didn't have any 
lectures associated with it. It was only me and a group of other 5 students working on a sorting robot that mimicked an 
airport baggage system, but on a smaller scale. It was the funniest shit I have ever done. We had so much fun during that 
time. It was a huge breath of fresh air after a hard year of studies and a couple of months I will never forget. I was going 
into the meetings as if it was holidays. We also did everything pretty efficiently and didn't even use half of the hours we 
needed. Although we didn't get the perfect grade, we did well. I made a couple of good friends that still keep in touch up to 
this day and can't wait to do something like this again if a possibility arises. One interesting thing to mention is that I 
didn't pick that team, since I forgot to fill in the preference survey for my teammates that was open during the time that I was very much preparing for the previous quartile exams. That 'decision' turned out better than expected for sure. I finished my last exam on the 27th of June and went home on the 28th.  

After all of this, describing myself as *very tired* would be an understatement by an order of a couple of thousand. At that 
point, going home was all I wanted. I was the happiest person in the world when I saw my family and home after such a year. 
Crazy to even think about it. I changed and learned a lot. I got small burnouts a couple of times and got back on my feet 
after all of them. I studied and took my courses seriously until the very last day and I was happy. I was also very glad that 
I liked almost everything that I studied during that year even though at some points it was too much, I still enjoyed it. Even 
on the flight back home, I remember looking over the topics we will cover in the Computer Networks course the next year, first 
quartile. It all felt so surreal. I was so immersed in the university that I forgot that going back home at some point was 
even a possibility. That is when you know it is necessary. Overall, I had some time to reflect on all that's happened and concluded the year to be very productive. In terms of self-growth regarding my impostor syndrome and educational growth as well. I didn't know what the next year would offer me, but I hoped it was going to be a little bit easier. But oh boy, I was wrong... I would have never guessed in a hundred years that this would happen to me, but it did.



